NAME
  autoreverse -- a simple ipv4 and ipv6 reverse DNS name server

SYNOPSIS
  autoreverse [-h|-help] [-v|-version]
              [-ignore-zone-errors] [-log] [-report time.Duration]
              [-synthesize] [-prepend string] [-origin domain]
              [-max-Answers int] [-TTL time.Duration] [-CHAOS] [-NSID string]
              [-user username] [-group groupname] [-chroot path]
              [-exclude-private] [-include-CIDR CIDR]...
              [-listen ipaddr]...
              [-axfr-zone domain/auth-server]... [-file-zone forward-zone-file]...

DESCRIPTION
  autoreverse is a simple authoritative DNS server with the solitary goal of making it
  trivially easy to auto-answer reverse queries for ipv4 and ipv6 with minimal
  configuration.

  In the simplest case autoreverse runs without *any* options at all and deduces
  everything needed to answer PTR queries with synthesized answers. A slightly more
  complex invocation involves supplying a forward zone (or zones)  from which PTR answers
  are deduced from A and AAAA resources. In more complex cases, command line options
  control behavior more precisely.

  In all cases you should no longer need to manually construct any of those error-prone
  PTR RRs with their multitude of reverse nibbles and inscrutable delegation boundaries.
  I hope that's as much of a relief to you as it is to this author who was primarily
  motivated by such madness to create this program.

USE CASES
  The simplest invocation is to run autoreverse with no options as root, thus:

    # autoreverse

  and autoreverse will reply to well-formed PTR queries (excepting private addresses) with
  a synthesized answer.

  Perhaps a more common use-case is when you want some of the answers to include your own
  domain details. To do this provide autoreverse with the zone file:

    # autoreverse example.net.zone

  and autoreverse will reply to well-formed PTR queries (again excepting private
  addresses) with either a matching name found in the zone file or a synthesized answer.

  A more complicated invocation is:

  # autoreverse -log -NSID `hostname` -include-CIDR 2001:db8:1234::/56  \
                -origin reverse.example.org                \
                -user nobody -group nobody -chroot /tmp    \
                -listen 192.0.2.1 -listen [2001:db8::1]:53 \
                -file-zone data/example.net.zone -file-zone data/example.com.zone \
                -axfr-zone example.org/a.ns.example.org

  which listens on multiple addresses, deduces reverse PTR names from multiple zone files,
  and a remote zone transfer; it also restrict answers to only PTR RRs that are in the
  2403:4801:2020::/48 range and gives away root permissions to run as an un-privileged
  daemon. This invocation also supplies the hostname in response to any query containing
  the NSID option. Finally, all DNS exchanges are logged to Stdout.

  Few use-cases require such a complicated invocation, but this exemplar serves to
  demonstrate less common features.

PROJECT INFORMATION
  Please visit: github.com/markdingo/autoreverse

OPTIONS
  -CHAOS
    	Answer CHAOS TXT queries to version.server and version.bind with the
    	Project URL. (default true)
  -NSID string
    	Respond to EDNS NSID sub-opt requests with the supplied string. This string
    	is encoded into hexadecimal by autoreverse for placement in the response so
    	don't supply this as hexadecimal yourself.
  -TTL duration
    	TTL to apply to all responses. For PTR RRs deduced from forward zones
    	autoreverse normally uses the associated address record TTL. However if this
    	option is set, the TTL of deduced answers are over-ridden. This value must not be
    	less than one second.
  -axfr-zone value
    	The forward zone is loaded from the authoritative name server via AXFR and
    	scanned for address records to deduce PTRs in exactly the same way as -file-zone.
    	The syntax for the supplied value is zone/auth-server:service, e.g.
    	'example.net/a.ns.example.net:domain'. (Yes, this is kindof a clunky setting, but
    	I'm strenuously avoiding introducting configuration files.)
  -chroot string
    	Downgrade process privileges by issuing a chroot(path). In conjunction with
    	-user and -group this option restricts access to a subset of the file system.
    	autoreverse must start as root for this option to succeed. The supplied path
    	*has* to be an absolute path otherwise the chroot() call fails.
    	
    	There are caveats with -chroot in that it impacts -file-zone and -axfr-zone.
    	Once chroot is set, *all* file access is relative to the -chroot directory.
    	This obviously affects -file-zone but also impacts name resolution which
    	often relies on files such as /etc/resolv.conf. If not properly established
    	a chroot can cause name resolution of -axfr-zone auth servers to fail.
  -exclude-private
    	Do not answer any queries in private address space as defined by RFC 1918,
    	Section 3. and RFC 4193, Section 8. If set, queries for these addresses result in
    	a "Refused" response. (default true)
  -file-zone value
    	The forward zone is loaded from the file and scanned for address records
    	to deduce PTR answers in preference to synthesized answers. This is a way of
    	mixing your own zone data with synthesized answers. Both -exclude-private and
    	-include-CIDR restrictions apply to PTRs deduced from the zone file.
    	
    	It's important to note that the -file-zone option is processed *after*
    	-chroot (if present) in which case the -file-zone path needs to be relative to
    	the chroot directory.
  -group string
    	Downgrade privileges by issuing a setgid(group) after Listen Sockets have been
    	opened. In conjunction with -user and -chroot this option is used to remove
    	root privileges and restrict access to other system components. autoreverse must
    	start as root for this option to succeed.
  -h	Alias for -help
  -help
    	Print usage message to stdout and exit(0)
  -ignore-zone-errors
    	Continue operating in the presence of errors fetching or parsing forward zones.
    	If set false, exit on any zone error.
    	
    	If errors are detected while loading or reloading zones, all previously
    	loaded values are retained and the current load attempt is discarded.
    	
    	This forbearance does not extend to deducing the origin domain for -synthesize.
    	
    	zone-related errors and warnings are always reported to Stdout regardless
    	of this setting. (default true)
  -include-CIDR value
    	Only answer queries to addresses within these networks. By default autoreverse
    	answers all well-formed PTR queries unless constrained by this option and
    	-exclude-private. This option is of use when loading forward zones which might
    	contain address space entries you'd rather not have exposed.
    	
    	Once there is one or more occurrences of -include-CIDR, autoreverse switches modes
    	whereby only queries in any of the included addresses are allowed. Queries outside
    	these addresses resulted in a "Refused" response. Note that -exclude-private is
    	expected to cover address ranges of concern.
  -listen value
    	Address to listen on for DNS queries. If just an IP address or host
    	name is supplied, autoreverse assumes the 'domain' service (aka port 53). A
    	specific port can be provided with the usual host:port, v4address:port or
    	[v6address]:port syntax.
    	
    	However the port is determined, on most Unix-like systems, autoreverse
    	will normally need to be started by root to listen to "privileged
    	ports" such as port 53. Under these circumstances, it is highly recommended that
    	the autoreverse invocation include the -user, -group and -chroot options to
    	downgrade process privileges once the Listen Sockets have been opened.
    	
    	autoreverse listens on both UDP and TCP for DNS queries. (The default if no
    	listen addresses are provided is :domain)
  -log
    	Log DNS exchanges to Stdout
  -max-Answers int
    	Maximum PTR RRs to allow in response. This helps constrain the size of
    	the response. This limit only has relevance to PTRs deduce from forward zones.
    	Regardless of this setting, the response is truncated to the maximum allowed by
    	the query, including any EDNS0 values. If set to zero, all available PTRs are
    	placed in the answer prior to truncation evaluation. (default 5)
  -origin string
    	Origin domain to append to synthesized PTRs. The origin domain is normally
    	deduced from either the first $ORIGIN of a zone file, the first domain AXFR
    	transferred or as a last resport, os.Hostname(). This option replaces that
    	deduction process with the specific domain. No surrounding '.'s needed.
  -prepend string
    	A string prepended to the origin Domain when synthesizing PTR answers. The
    	complete PTR answer consists of qname-as-ip.prepend.originDomain. This option
    	can be set to the empty string. No surrounding '.'s needed. (default "autoreverse")
  -report duration
    	Interval between stats reports (default 10m0s)
  -synthesize
    	Synthesize missing PTRs. If a PTR query cannot be satisfied with any address
    	records found in loaded zones and this flag is true then a synthetic response is
    	generated based on the qName, the prepend setting and the origin Domain. If this
    	flag is false a "REFUSED" response is returned.
    	
    	If set, this option implies that autoreverse *must* be able to deduce an origin
    	Domain. If an origin Domain cannot be deduce or one is not set with -origin, then
    	autoreverse exits with an error message. (default true)
  -user string
    	Downgrade privileges by issuing a setgid(group) after Listen Sockets have been
    	opened. In conjunction with -group and -chroot this option is used to remove root
    	privileges and restrict access to other system components. autoreverse must start
    	as root for this option to succeed.
  -v	Alias for -version
  -verbose
    	Print extensive setup details
  -version
    	Print version and origin URL then exit

Note: The -listen, -include, -file-zone and -axfr-zone options can be repeated multiple
      times.

SIGNALS
  SIGUSR1 - generates an immediate stats report
  SIGTERM - initiate shutdown
  SIGHUP - attempt an immediate reload of forward zones
  SIGINT - reserved

Program:    autoreverse v0.0.1
ProjectURL: github.com/markdingo/autoreverse
